---
title: Making money via sloppy record keeping
date: 2019-10-08 21:27:58 -0400
tags:
  - Money
  - Sloppiness
category: Diary
---

**TL;DR**: We leased a car, transferred the lease to someone else within the
allowed period, GM Financial due to their sloppy record keeping, continued to
think that we still held the lease and sent us a $1200 bill that I had to call
them to get it cancelled. My thesis: this sloppy record keeping probably
generates a little bit of revenue&mdash;if the bill is small enough, some folks
will just pay it instead of contesting it.

Back in August 2016, we had earlier that year plunked down the $1000 to hold our
spot in line for a Tesla Model 3, and figured we could drive our stoic old Camry
until it hit the ground&mdash;we expected that would be at least a few years,
since it had been running without any issues up until then.

Then, [this happened][camry]. I was driving to work, with a trunkful of monitors
and Hue doodads that a friend was buying off me, and got broadsided by an
unlicensed driver who was driving a rental car they did not have permission to
drive. The scene was sufficiently confusing to the responding officers (in a
stroke of luck, this was down the street from Boston police headquarters) that
they asked me to stick around just in case they needed to arrest the other
driver (they did not).

Our venerable Blueberry unfortunately did not make it out&mdash;the damage was
so severe that a repair would have cost nearly $12,000, and that was using the
cheapest parts that the adjuster could find on the market (scrapyard parts,
etc.). The true cost likely would have been closer to $15,000, and our
insurance, rightfully, was not going to pay that. They paid us out the ~$7,000
value of the car, and went off to recover from the other involved parties. Part
of me wishes we were still with them so I could ask how that all went&mdash;I
imagine the attorneys earned their hourlies on that one.

We needed a new car PDQ&mdash;we were able to borrow from my parents for a few
weeks, but we needed a long term ride. We tested a few things, did some
research, and ended up with a Chevy Volt. We were big fans of most things about
the car and ended up signing up for a 3 year lease, with a great rate thanks to
some shrewd negotiating (read: we walked out on the original bullshit rate). We
figured this would be a great way to ease into electric vehicles while having
the ready backup of gas if we needed it. We signed for a 3 year lease and
figured we would cross the bridge of getting rid of the lease when that time came.

That time came in July of 2018 when we priced out and paid for our Model 3.
Luckily, we found someone to take over the lease, got everything done in record
time, and got the lease assumption in under two wires:

1. We were leaving the country for a 3 week vacation
2. We were approaching &lt;12 months left on the lease, at which point it could
   not be transferred anymore.

I continued to get mail from GM Financial/the dealer we leased through, but
chalked it off as marketing. The bills were getting paid by the new lessee, and
everyone was happy.

The lease ended about a month ago, and the new lessee returned the
car&mdash;they were told that there would not be any additional fees for excess
wear and tear/mileage, etc., and relayed that information to me as a courtesy.
Imagine my surprise when last week, I receive a letter from GM thanking me for
returning my vehicle, and asking me to pay $1200 in disposition fees, excess
wear and tear fees, property taxes, and "other fees." After a quick
back-and-forth with the new lessee, I decided to call up GM Financial.

The good news is, once I got them on the phone, they were very pleasant! I was
put on hold briefly while the Lease End specialist talked to the Lease
Assumption specialist, and they came back with a "please disregard that bill, we
see here that the lease was assumed."

This got me thinking, though: **how often does this happen for smaller dollar
amounts, and the person recieving the bill does not contest it?**

I suspect it's not a lot&mdash;after all, the lease disposition fee was around
$350, and the only _small_ amount on the listing was the "other fees and taxes,"
which dialed in around $50.

However, if this sort of sloppy record keeping is the standard, they must be
sending out a ton of these letters. How many need to "hit" and be paid without
question in order for the sloppy record to become a pathological target for the
department to hit, because it makes money. Otherwise, what's the incentive to
not fix this? It certainly costs money when I call in to support (GM Financial's
help line has always been staffed by American staff, so they're not paying low
offshore costs), so why not fix the process so that they don't ever have to deal
with this again?

[camry]: /assets/images/camry_broadside.jpg
